Lorenz96 model online implementation with PDAF

This directory contains a full implementation of PDAF with the nonlinear
Lorenz96 model. (E. N. Lorenz (1996) Predictability - a problem partly 
solved. Proceedings Seminar on Predictability, ECMWF, READING, UK)

Next to the implementation, tool programs and scripts are included that
allow to run a test case and to display the outputs.

-- NOTES -------------------------------------------------------------------

The implementation uses the NetCDF library for output.
The directory tools/ contains scripts to run a forward model and perform a
set of simple assimilation experiments.
The directory plotting/ contains a set a basic plotting scripts for Matlab.

-- RUNNING THE TEST CASE ---------------------------------------------------

To run the test case, you can do the following:

1. Compile the forward model without assimilation
Build the forward model program with
  make lorenz_96
You have to ensure that in the machine-specific make include file -DUSE_PDAF
is not defined for CPP_DEFS (such that calls to PDAF are not active).

2. Run the forward model
Run the forward model using
  ./tools/runmodel.sh
(If an error 'Command not found' is displayed, you likely need to adapt
the first line of the script, which defines the shell, to your machine.)
The script runs the model for 10000 time steps and generates the file state.nc

3. Generate observations and a covariance matrix from the model
First build the tool programs. For this, cd to the directory
tools/ and build the executables using
  make all
Then execute
  ./generate_obs
and
  ./generate_covar
to generate a file holding observations (obs.nc) and a file holding the
covariance matrix information (covar.nc), which is used to generate an
initial ensemble for the data assimilation experiments. Both files and
written into the directy lorenz96/.

4. Build the assimilation program
Edit the machine-specific make include file in make.arch such that
now -DUSE_PDAF is defined for CPP_DEFS.
cd back to the lorenz96 main directory (cd ..) and compile the Lorenz96
model with activated PDAF. First clean the directory using
  make clean
(This removes object files that were compiled without support for PDAF)
Then build the executable using
  make pdaf_lorenz_96

5. Run data assimilation experiments
Run the example assimilation experiments using 
  ./tools/runasml.sh 
The script runsasml.sh runs 11 experiments with a fixed ensemble size, but
different covariance inflations (forgetting factors). The execution can 
take about 2 minutes.

6. Plot output from the assimilation experiments
To display the output of the assimilation experiments cd to 
plotting/. See the file README there for a description of the
available scripts for plotting with Matlab. 
For example,
  plot_example.m 
plots the true and estimated mean RMS errors as a function of the
forgetting factor. For the usage of the other functions, use 'help'
in Matlab.


-- GENERATING SYNTHETIC OBSERVATIONS WITH PDAF  ----------------------------

Using the program previously compiled with 'make pdaf_lorenz_96' you can
generate synthetic observations directly with the program. This is different
from using step 3 (tools/generate_obs) above as this step simulates real
observations.

To generate synthetic observations run as follows:

Run the example observation generation using 
  ./tools/rungenobs.sh
This generates the file syntobs.nc, which holds the synthetic
observations. Also the file t11_N2_genobs.nc is generated, which does not
contain useful information (prepoststep_pdaf generates this file as in the
case of an assimilation; one could deactivate this writing for the
case of observation generation)

The script runsgenobs.sh runs 1 experiment with ensemble size 1 over
200 time steps to generate synthetic observations. The important
settings in the script are
   -filtertype 11
and
   -type_ensinit 'tru'
The first setting choose to perform the observation generation.
The second setting, the ensemble initialization type 'tru' selects to
initialize the single ensemble state with the rue initial state (the same
used in step 2 above when the true state trajectoy is generated).

Please note that the observations generate in step 4 and those in
syntobs.nc are not the same. The program in step 4 uses a different random
numbers as PDAF. On the code of generate_obs.F90 one can change the random
number seed to the value used in PDAF (it is present in the code, but
outcommented) to generate the same observational values and make the
experiment results comparable.


-- USING SYNTHETIC OBSERVATIONS IN A TWIN EXPERIMENT  ----------------------

Having generated a file holding synthetic observations one can run an
assimilation twin experiment. The experiment runs analogously to step 6
above. However, one needs to activate the flag 'twin_experiment'.

Run the example twin experiment using 
  ./tools/runtwin.sh
This runs a single twin experiment over 500 time steps. The relevant
setting in the run script is
  -twin_experiment t
which activates in the routine init_dim_obs_full.F90 that the
observation vector with values read from the observation file generated
in step 4 are overwritten with the values from the file syntobs.nc. The
experiment generates the file t1_N30_f0.95_twin.nc

One can plot the output with the provided plot script as in step 6.

