PDAF-OMI - Observation Module Infrastructure

Copyright 2019-2021, Lars Nerger, Alfred Wegener Institute Helmholz Center
for Polar and Marine Research, Bremerhaven, Germany. 
For license information, please see the file LICENSE.txt.

PDAF was written by Lars Nerger (lars.nerger@awi.de)


Introduction ---------------------------------------------------------

PDAF-OMI is an extension to PDAF to provide a defined structure
for observation operators and observation handling.

OMI keeps each observation type in its own Fortran module to ensure
the independence of the observation types. There are two routines in
each module, which one to performn the initialization of observational
information and the other to apply the observation operator. All
other observation related call-back routines are generic and provided
the PDAF-OMI. Thus, with OMI one merely needs to implement the
observation-specific routine init_dim_obs_f and the corresponding
observation operatorroutine obs_op_f. Inside each observation module
a Fortran data type for the full observations stores all observational
information. Here, init_dim_obs_f needs to fill the different variables,
which are then used by the different routines for other observation
tasks.

The core routines of PDAF-OMI provide different generic routines
for the observation handling. In addition, PDAF-OMI provides a
set of common observation operators.

With PDAF-OMI the PDAF call-back routines simplify to calling
for each observation type a subroutine for the observation
operation for this particular observation. Specific operations
are then performed in the subroutines from the observation
modules and the generic PDAF-OMI routines. This reduces the
call-back routines to pass-through routines, which significantly
reduces the amount of coding required to implement support for
a new observation type. The call-back routines are collected
in the file callback_obs_pdafomi.F90, so that they can be
adapted in this single file.

When one adds an observation type, one has to implement an
observation-specific module, which holds the routines
init_dim_obs_f and obs_op_f. This implementation can be done
using the template /templates/omi/obs_TYPE_pdafomi_TEMPLATE.F90. 
In addition, one has to add the observation-specific calls
in the routines in callback_obs_pdafomi.F90. The setting of whether
the observation is to be assimilated, will be added to init_pdaf.F90.
